---
layout: post
categories: math
title: A hard problem regarding continuous lattice
description: Two definitions of way-below relation differ. It is still hard to prove that they are de facto equivalent to each other.
---
 
The discussion of denotational semantics of computer programs involves lattice theory.
In the procedure of introducing Scott semantics, in lattice theory there are several different 
concepts which are important: (why continuous lattice is especially important?)

Complete partial order (cpo's), complete lattices, continuous lattices
and algebraic lattices.

In the definition of continuous lattice, it involves a crucial concept which is so-called "way-below 
relation". Literally, "a is way-below than b" means a is far lower than b. 

In H.P. (Henk) Barendregt's book, the definition of way-below is:

[Definition 1] Let x, y belongs to C which is a cpo equipped with Scott topology, then we say
x is way below y (notation x << y) if y is in the topological interior of {z | x <= z}.

However, on the wikipedia page of "domain theory", in the sub-section of "way-below relation", the definition 
of way-below is:

[Definition 2] An element x is way below an element y, if, for every directed set D with supremum 
such that y <= sup D, there is some element d in D such that x <= d. We also say that x approximates 
y and writes x << y.

It is obvious the two definitions are not appearing to be same. In fact, it is easy to obtain Definition 2 
from Definition 1, in the following steps:

1. If y is in the (topological) interior of {z | x <= z}, it means there is a (Scott) open set A, 
such that y belongs to A, A is a subset of {z | x <= z}.

2. Because open sets are upwards closed, given that y <= sup D, D is a directed set, we have sup D belongs to A. 

3. By the definition of open sets again, we have the intersection of D and A is non-empty.

4. Due to the fact A is a subset of {z | x <= z}, we know that D intersects {z | x <= z}. 

Therefore, Definition 1 implies Definition 2.

Nevertheless, it is much harder to prove the other direction holds, i.e., to prove Definition 1 from Definition 2. 
The key difficulty is the difficulty in constructing the open set A given that Definition 1 holds. On the other hand, 
to construct a counterexample, we are required to prove the non-existence of such an A, which is difficult too.

If such a counterexample existed, it would mean the both definitions are not de facto equivalent.

It is reported that Definition 2 is the form used most commonly as the definition of "way-below relation".

Note1:

An equivalent form of Definition 1 and Definition 2 is (given that x <= y holds):

[Definition 1'] x is way below y (x << y) if there is an (Scott) open set A, such that {z | y <= z} <=
A <= {z | x <= z}. By the definition of Scott topology, it means that A is upwards closed and for every
directed set D such that sup D belongs to A, D intersects A.

[Definition 2'] x is way below y (x << y) if for every directed set D such that sup D belongs
to {y | y <= z} (which is stronger than the condition in Definition 1'), D intersects {z | x <= z} 
(which is weaker than in Definition 1').

Obviously, a counterexample of Definition 2' => Definition 1' would require x is not equal to y, and both 
{z | y <= z} and {z | x <= z} are not Scott open.  

Note2: 

A Scott domain is a bounded omega-algebraic cpo, and every algebraic cpo is continuous cpo. Therefore
the concept of continuous lattice is relevant to Scott domain.

